---
author: Chris Godwin
category: Philosophy
title: 'Roycroftian Paganism I: The Deliberate Craft'
tags:
  - approach
  - vision
  - roycroft
  - craft
date: 2023-06-12
contributors:
  - Christopher Godwin
summary: Explaining the Roycroft philosophy of Craft and how it can be applied to polytheist practice.
---
## Key Points
1. **Roycroft Background:** The term "Roycroft" refers to a community of artisans and writers founded by Elbert Hubbard in East Aurora, New York, in the late 19th century. It was inspired by the dedication to fine craftsmanship of 17th century English bookbinders, Samuel and Thomas Roycroft.

1. **Roycroft Philosophy:** The philosophy of Roycroft, developed by Hubbard, venerates artisanal craftsmanship, the dignity of manual labor, and the creation of high-quality, beautiful objects. The Roycrofters aimed to offer an antidote to the dehumanizing effects of factory labor by emphasizing creativity, community, learning, and respect for the process of making things by hand.

1. **Key Tenets:** The tenets of the Roycroft philosophy include the value of handmade goods, the dignity of labor, a commitment to quality, artistic expression, the importance of community, and life enrichment. 

1. **Relevance to Polytheist Practice:** Although not discussed in depth in the excerpt, the application of Roycroft principles to polytheist practice is the article's underlying theme.

## Roycroft

![Roycroft Logo](http://www.thecraftsmanbungalow.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Roycroft-Logos-2.jpg)

The term "Roycroft" in this context refers to a community of artisans and
writers founded by Elbert Hubbard in East Aurora, New York, near the end of the
19th century. The name itself was inspired by two English bookbinders from the
17th century, Samuel and Thomas Roycroft, whose dedication to fine craftsmanship
inspired Hubbard.

The Roycroft community or the "Roycrofters," as they were called, were part of
the Arts and Crafts Movement, a broader social and aesthetic movement that
championed the value of handcrafted, decorative arts as a reaction against the
growing industrialization and mass production of the time.
## Roycroft Campus
The Roycroft Campus, where this community was based, is now a National Historic
Landmark, and it's where they produced their furniture, metalwork, and books,
expressing this philosophy through their work.

[![Image of the Roycroft Campus](http://www.thecraftsmanbungalow.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Roycroft-Campus-605x379.jpg)](https://www.thecraftsmanbungalow.com/elbert-hubbard-roycroft-campus/)

## Roycroft philosophy
The Roycroft philosophy of craft essentially comes Elbert Hubbard. The name
"Roycroft" was chosen to reflect the spirit of artisan guilds of the European
Middle Ages.

It's philosophy that venerates artisanal craftsmanship, the dignity of manual
labor, and the creation of high-quality, beautiful objects. The Roycrofters
sought to create a model of work that could offer an antidote to the
dehumanizing effects of factory labor, emphasizing instead creativity,
community, learning, and a deep respect for the process of making things by
hand.

## The Tenets
* Value in Handmade Goods: The Roycroft movement believed in the value of
  handmade crafts over mass-produced items. They thought that products made by
  hand had a quality and character that couldn't be matched by things made by
  machines.

* Dignity of Labor: This philosophy recognized the dignity and worth of the
  artisan's labor. They saw crafting as an expression of creativity and skill,
  and each piece of work was seen as a testament to the artisan's dedication and
  hard work.

* Commitment to Quality: The Roycrofters were dedicated to high-quality
  craftsmanship. They believed in taking the time to make something well, rather
  than rushing to produce as many items as possible.

* Artistic Expression: They viewed crafting not just as a way to make useful
  items, but also as a form of artistic expression. The Roycrofters blended form
  and function to create beautiful pieces of work.

* Community: The Roycroft philosophy emphasized the idea of a supportive
  community of artisans who worked together, shared ideas, and supported each
  other.

* Life Enrichment: For Roycrofters, their philosophy was not just about making
  objects; it was a way of life that valued personal growth, education, and a
  joyous approach to work.

Basically forming ideals around handcraftsmanship, individual creativity,
quality, and the value of community, seeing these elements as ways to bring
meaning and fulfillment to life.

## Elbert Hubbard
Elbert Hubbard, born in 1856, was an ambitious, charismatic, and energetic man.
Before founding the Roycroft community, he was a successful soap salesman and
had a promising career in business. However, a transformative experience made
him reconsider his values and the direction of his life.

In 1892, while he was still involved in the world of business, Hubbard took a
trip to Europe. One of his stops was in England, where he had the chance to
visit William Morris, a renowned poet, artist, philosopher, and a central figure
of the Arts and Crafts movement in Britain. Morris believed in the value of
work, the beauty of nature, and the importance of handcrafted goods in an age of
increasing industrialization and mass production.

During his visit, Hubbard was deeply impressed by the workshops he saw, where
artisans were creating beautiful handmade items, each one unique and crafted
with care and pride. He compared this with the factories back in America, where
goods were mass-produced by machines, with little care for aesthetics or
individuality. Hubbard began to feel a growing disquiet with the impersonality
and monotony of mass production.

He saw how mass production turned workers into cogs in the machine, where they
performed repetitive tasks, often under harsh conditions. There was no room for
creativity, personal growth, or the satisfaction that comes from crafting a
beautiful, useful object with one's own hands. Hubbard felt that this was not
only dehumanizing but also that it resulted in products that lacked the
character, quality, and beauty of handmade goods.

Inspired by his experience, Hubbard returned to America with a new vision. He
sold his shares in the soap company and used the proceeds to buy a print shop in
East Aurora, New York, which he turned into the Roycroft community. Here,
artisans could live and work together, creating high-quality, handcrafted goods
and living out the values that he had come to hold dear.

Elbert Hubbard became an advocate for a return to craftsmanship, the dignity of
labor, and the value of handmade over mass-produced goods. His commitment to
these principles made him one of the most influential figures in the American
Arts and Crafts movement and left a lasting legacy in the world of design and
craftsmanship.

Elbert Hubbard, a figure known for his rebellious spirit and unorthodox
perspectives, achieved fame through his provocative and challenging publications
under the Roycroft Press. His most well-known work is the brief yet impactful
essay, "A Message to Garcia," first published in 1899.

The essay cleverly uses a historical event from the Spanish-American War as a
metaphor for personal initiative and dedication to work. It tells the story of
an American officer, Andrew Rowan, who was tasked with the seemingly impossible
mission of delivering a message to General Calixto Garcia, a leader of the Cuban
insurgency. Hubbard celebrated Rowan's resourcefulness and initiative, even
amidst the vagueness of his assignment.

While Hubbard's message was interpreted in a variety of ways, some viewed it as
a controversial call for blind obedience in workers, sparking criticism.
Despite, or perhaps because of this controversy, it became extraordinarily
popular, especially among business leaders. It was reprinted millions of times
and translated into many languages.

Not one to shy away from challenging norms, Hubbard also published "The
Philistine: A Periodical of Protest." This magazine was a vessel for his
rebellious spirit, filled to the brim with satirical and biting commentary on
society, politics, and the arts. It often launched criticisms against the
establishment and questioned the status quo, which further established it as a
rebellious entity.

Despite no specific record indicating that Hubbard was ever warned against
printing these provocative works, their controversial nature likely attracted
admonitions and criticisms in their time. Yet Hubbard's fearless character was
undeterred.

Hubbard's daring publishing ventures were an integral part of the broader
Roycroft movement. They were a testament to his belief in individualism, the
dignity of work, and the potency of art and craftsmanship. Above all, they
embodied his rebellious spirit, unyielding determination, and readiness to
question and challenge conventional wisdom, making him a central figure in his
philosophy and the work of the Roycroft community.

[Roycroftian Paganism II: The Deliberate Craft](./roycrotian-paganism-part-deux/)